# Coffee-alternate-bearing


Abstract
Like many perennial crops, coffee exhibits alternate bearing, a pattern of reproduction in which high-yielding years are followed by low-yielding ones. Alternate bearing threatens farmer livelihoods, yet little is known about the underlying mechanisms in coffee or the potential for farm management to mitigate it. The resource budget model, an ecological theory positing endogenous resource tradeoffs as the driver of reproductive variability, could help fill this gap. On three coffee farms in Santa María de Dota, Costa Rica, we manipulated relative fruit load, fertilizer levels, and shade cover to test whether the model’s core assumptions (i.e., that fruiting depletes resources and limits investment in subsequent reproduction) can elucidate patterns of alternate bearing in coffee, and to assess whether these patterns are impacted by farm management practices. Coffee plants exhibited within-year and between-year tradeoffs of a high fruit load that scaled from decreased bean size during the same season to fewer fruited nodes and fruits per node in both old and new cohorts of branches during the subsequent season. Stem nitrogen concentration was also depleted in response to high fruit loads and recovered during the subsequent season of low fruiting. The findings provide novel evidence that tradeoffs of a high fruit load are manifested in several reproductive traits at both the branch- and plant-level and offer initial support for the resource budget model in the system.  While both moderate shade and increased fertilizer levels tended to improve reproductive traits, a lack of interactive effects between either management treatment and the relative fruit load treatment suggests that they do little to mitigate the reproductive tradeoffs underlying alternate bearing.

The key to the variables in each dataset can be found here:
 [readme.docx](https://github.com/gmgarcia92/Coffee-alternate-bearing/files/9549990/readme.docx)
